# [Nocturnal Revels (1779)](https://www.exclassics.com/cvcal/cvcal0065.htm)

## Chapter XXIV.

***Charlotte's fruitful projects for raising fresh female recruits for her nunnery. Her success. Her invitation to a high luscious banquet, in which she personates the Queen Oberea. Her improvement upon the rites of Venus, as performed at Otaheite. A very descriptive and salacious scene, founded on the most orthodox philosophy*.

            We are going to pay a final visit to Charlotte Hayes, before she quits King's Place; and as she was resolved, ere she retired from business, to make some capital strokes, she first began to recruit her nunnery with fresh pieces, in two different ways. The first was, by attending Register Offices; the second, by advertisement. We shall give a specimen of both these operations.

            Charlotte dressed herself in a plain, simple manner, resembling the wife of a decent tradesman, and repaired to the different Register Offices about town, inquiring for a young, healthful-looking woman, about twenty, whose chief employment was to attend upon a lady who resided in her first floor. Sometimes she thought proper to make her lodger bed-ridden; at other times, a little out of her mind; however, the wages were very handsome, and above the common rate. By these means she would have frequently a score in a day call upon her. In order to carry this scheme into execution, she took a variety of lodgings in different parts of the town, and sometimes small houses ready furnished; as the character of her nunnery in the neighbourhood, if enquired after, would have given the alarm, and prevented her accomplishing the design. When any decent girl with a good face applied, she always hired her for the lady in the first floor, who was very ill, and could not see her. It was requisite that the servant should lie by her, as her infirmities were so great, that it was necessary to have an attendant near her all night.

            These preliminaries being settled, as the maidservants generally go to their places in the evening, the unsuspicious girl was shown into a dark room; the lady's eyes being so bad that she could not bear a light. At ten o'clock the house all retired to rest; but it was expedient, previous to this step, to have some supper. The girl with, perhaps, a very keen appetite, was allowed to sup with the landlady (Charlotte), when a good substantial dish was brought forth, good strong ale, and, as it was the first night, and to show her hospitality, would indulge her with a glass of wine. Nancy's spirits being thus elevated, she retires to bed to her supposed superannuated mistress -- when, lo! The poor innocent girl finds herself, in her first sleep, in the arms of Lord C----n, Lord B----ke, or Colonel L----e. In vain she laments the fraud that has been played upon her; her outcries bring no one to her relief, and probably she yields to her fate, finding it inevitable; and solaces herself in the morning with a few guineas, and the perspective view of having a new gown, a pair of silver buckles, and a black silk cloak. Being once broke in, there is no great difficulty in persuading her to remove her quarters, and repair to the nunnery in King's Place, in order to make room for another victim, who is to be sacrificed in the like manner.

            When a sufficient supply from these resources was not produced, advertisements in the daily papers often had the desired effect, and brought in numbers of pretty candidates (though unknowingly) for prostitution. Most of these advertisements were of a serious nature, and carried with them all the appearance of truth, sincerity, and a good place, for any young woman inclined to go to service. But sometimes Charlotte would flourish in the jocular style, at least some of her friends for her; and even these ludicrous publications have inveigled the innocent and unguarded. One in particular appeared some time ago, which was very laughable, and was ascribed to George S----n.

"WANTED, A young woman, under twenty, who has had the smallpox, and has not been long in town, as a Maid Servant of all work, in a genteel family. She must turn her hand to everything, as it proposed putting her under a man cook of skill and eminence. She must get up small things, and even large ones occasionally, understand clear-starching without clapping, and know something of pasty, at least to make standing crust; and also preserving fruit. Good wages and proper encouragement will be given, if she proves handy, and can easily conceive, according to the instructions given to her."

            Ludicrous as this advertisement may appear, it had so much effect, as to produce at least half-a-dozen young women, who came in consequence to be hired, and soon were made to turn their hands to everything.

            By these schemes Charlotte had now initiated a dozen fine wenches, all wholesome and blooming, into the arcanum of the nunnery; and she had now begun to train them for a new species of amusement for her noble and honourable guests. They had already gone through their exercises for near a fortnight, twice every day, when she dispatched a circular card to all her best customers.

"Mrs Hayes, presents her most respectful compliments to Lord ----, and takes the liberty to acquaint him, that tomorrow evening, precisely at seven, a dozen beautiful nymphs, unsullied and untainted, and who breathe health and nature, will perform the celebrated rites of Venus, as practised at Otaheite, under the instruction and tuition of Queen Oberea; in which character Mrs Hayes will appear upon this occasion."

            That the reader may form a competent idea of their exercises, we shall give the following quotation from Cook's Voyage, written by the celebrated Doctor Hawkesworth.

"Such were our Matins*,*" speaking of some religious ceremonies performed by the Indians in the morning. "Our Indians thought fit to perform Vespers of a very different kind. A young man, six feet high, performed the rites of Venus with a little girl about eleven or twelve years of age, before several of our people, and a great number of the natives, without the least sense of its being indecent or improper, but, as appeared, in perfect conformity to the custom of the place. Among the spectators were several women of superior rank, particularly Oberea, who may properly be said to have assisted at the ceremony; for they gave instructions to the girl how to perform her part, which, young as she was, she did not seem much to stand in need of."

            The reader will certainly not be displeased with Dr. Hawkesworth's comment upon the performance of these rites, as they are more than curious, truly philosophical. He says,

"This incident is not mentioned as an object of idle curiosity, but as it deserves consideration in determining, which has long been debated in philosophy, whether the shame attending certain actions; which are allowed on all sides to be in themselves innocent, is implanted in nature, or superinduced by custom? It if has its origin in custom, it will, perhaps, be found difficult to trace that custom, however general, to its source,: if in instinct it will be equally difficult to discover for what cause it is subdued, or over ruled among these people, in whose manners the least trace is to be found."
Hawkesworth's *Voyages*, Vol.II. P.128.

            Mrs Hayes had certainly consulted these pages with common attention, and she concluded, that shame upon similar occasions "was only superinduced by custom*;*" and being so much a natural Philosopher as to have surmounted all prejudices, she resolved not only to teach her nuns all the rites of Venus as practised at Otaheite, but to improve upon them, with the invention, fancy, and caprice of Aretino<[61](https://www.exclassics.com/cvcal/cvcalnotes.htm#n61)\>; having taught them every one of his postures, in their former rehearsals, and in which they were already pretty expert.

            Upon this salacious Olympic, she had no less than three-and-twenty visitors, conflicting chiefly of the first nobility, some baronets, and but five commoners.

            No sooner had the clock struck seven, than the Festino began. She had engaged a dozen of the most athletic, and best proportioned young men that could be procured; some of the royal academic figures, and the rest qualified for the sport. A large carpet being laid, and all the apparatus for the various attitudes into which the votaries of Venus were to appear, according to the Aretino system, being prepared -- after the males had presented each of their mistresses with a nail of at least twelve inches in length, in imitation of the presents received by the ladies of Otaheite upon these occasions, giving the preference to a long nail before any other compliment -- they entered upon their devotions, and went through all the various evolutions, according to the word of command of Santa Charlotta, with the greatest dexterity, keeping the most regular time, to the no small gratification of the lascivious spectators, some of whom could scarce refrain still the end of the spectacle, before they were impetuous to perform a part in this Cyprian game, which lasted nearly two hours, and met with the highest applause from all present; Mrs Hayes's directions being so judicious, that scarce a manoeuvre was performed but with the greatest exactitude and address.

            The rites being finished, a collection was made for the votaries of Venus, and a handsome purse subscribed upon the occasion. The male devotees being now dismissed, the females remained, and most of them repeated the part they had so skilfully performed, with several of the spectators. Before they retired to rest, the Champagne briefly circulated, and catches and glees added to the merriment of the evening.

            About four in the morning every Thaïs had been selected, and was retired to rest; and soon after Charlotte threw herself into the arms of the Count, to practise, in part at least, what she was so great a mistress of in theory.

            Here we shall drop the festoon curtains for the present, and leave them all till about twelve at noon, to meet and breakfast; as the fatigues of the evening must have imposed the necessary tax of sleep till at least that time.

**