## NO MORE A-ROVING SO LATE INTO THE NIGHT
### Page 208
There were specific ways, too, in which it is reasonable to speculate he may have become infected. Brummell was a central figure in a crowd of men who frequently courted as a group the attentions of a single woman—a leading lady in society like Princess Frederica or more often a courtesan. Harriette Wilson once admitted to being in a large gathering of men, all of whom she had known sexually. It was part of the demimonde scene that was also Brummell's. "The amorous beaux," wrote the author of The English Spy, "naturally inflame the ardour of each other's desires by their admiration for the general object of excitement [a courtesan or prostitute] until the possessing of such a treasure becomes a matter of heroism." Sexual conquest in this scenario becomes "a prize for which the young and gay will perform the most unaccountable prodigies, sacrifice health... and eventually life, to bear away in triumph the fair conqueror of hearts."

It could be argued that this behavior exhibits an extension of the "unnatural" world of public schools like Eton, where sexuality is first understood in the context of an all-male world. It must also be said that this particular style of promiscuity, reminiscent of the activities of modern sports teams or, for that matter, Russian ballet stars, where the esprit de corps of a group of men is expressed in competitive courting, or even group sexual activity with a single woman, speaks of a barely suppressed homosexual bond.

The Cyprians' balls were in a tradition of entertainment for men that had as its premise and ultimate goal a much more erotic intent than dancing. Perhaps the most famous was the Grand Bal de Mort, held by the courtesan Elizabeth Mitchell, but attended by many aristocratic ladies of fallen reputation. The invitees wore fig leaves, in the biblical tradition, but over their faces and were otherwise naked. The evening, inevitably, declined into an orgy. Masquerades, such as the one organized by Brummell in 1813 at the

### Page 209

Argyle Rooms, were barely concealed imitations of this Cyprian practice. Masqueraders could flirt without tear of recognition, but were also likely to be more aware of their body language. The theatricality of the Cyprian fetes went to its extremes for the reenact-ment, staged by Mrs. O'Kelley, of the "Tahitian Feast of Venus" - a spurious tribute to the anthropological researches of Captain Cook. The masqueraders were entertained by live sex acts performed by South Sea islanders (Mrs. O'Kelley's latest girls), "all spotless virgins" and "a dozen well-endowed athletic youths... each holding a dildo-shaped object wreathed in flowers." Twenty-three gentlemen "of the highest breeding," including five members of Parliament, turned up to watch and participate. The nature of the entertainment on offer at the Cyprians' balls was altogether more sedate, but the purpose was identical. The Cyprians found theatrical means to drum up support for their particular endeavor:
Harriette, Julia and Amy sold sex.

The tight world of the Cyprians, where only gentlemen of the ton were admitted, expressed masculine exclusivity in terms Brummell would have well understood. Sex was part of the group experience. If Brummell's supposedly semihidden sexuality and projection of a "cool" sexual persona was symptomatic not of asexuality but of a highly sexual if troubled bisexuality - might such an experience after a Cyprians' fete explain his syphilis? Even his earliest encounters with Susan Heath, the headmaster's daughter, or Julia Johnstone, may be seen as setting a pattern that was continued, dis-astrously, in adult life. Brummell chased women in the company of men; his sexual development was arrested at this adolescent stage. In this he was far from atypical of his class, time and a means of sexual relation that has been described as homosocial. When the evidence is taken together, on the one hand his syphilitic condition and on the other the amount of time he spent in the company of courtesans-now understood as a wildly promiscuous rather than a merely scandalous world—a case can be made that he was most likely sexually involved with one or more of them, within the con-text, however intimate, of their shared "ownership" by his coterie

### Page 210

of men. The picture of the Cyprians' ball in The English Spy and its description from Bernard Blackmantle make it clear that there were many more sexually available women present than just the Three Graces. One of these may well have been the sexual partner, shared with others present at different times, who passed on the infection to Brummell.
By 1816 it must have been obvious to Brummell, and to his friends, that he had syphilis. It was unlikely to have been talked about: gentlemen didn't. The advertisements for the cures that appeared at the time in French and English periodicals make it clear that this prevalent disease was dealt with quietly, privately and, to a surprising de-gree, effectively. Doctors were known to treat ladies infected by their husbands without either party within the marriage being aware of the diagnosis. The mercury administered as pills and as ointments did rid the patient of the more obvious symptoms of in-fection: the chance disappeared; the rash subsided. But men like Brummell were tragically in error when they thought they were cured and could resume their lives and sexual practices. The horror that awaited many was not so much the return of the disease, but that their infection would be passed on, even to unborn children.

And then there was the depression. Brummell wrote frequently about his "blue devils," which would have been exacerbated by his syphilis and by the mercury poisons. This, as much as the alternating effect on his libido by the disease, was what caused his growing isolation and his self-destructive behavior. The man, the disease and its effect were known well to Bulwer-Lytton when he created his fictionalized Brummell in Pelham:
It was a strange thing to see a man with costly taste, luxurious habis, great talents peculiarly calculated for display, courted by the highest members of the state, admired for his beauty and genius by half the women in London, yet living in the most ascetic seclusion from his kind, and indulging in the darkest and most morbid despondency. No female

### Page 211

was seen to win even his momentary glance of admiration. All the senses appeared to have lost for him, their customary allurements.

Those who knew Brummell, and who recognized what was happening to him, had good cause to be anxious for his welfare and for the future.